---
layout: post
title: Switching React class names like a boss with Deciders
tags: [dev, frontend, react]
image: "/images/covers/decider.webp"
tldr: You can switch a class names of React components with deciders, and it feels like a breeze.
---

Imagine you have a Header component. Its class name is always `header`, but on a mobile device, it should be also `mobile`. Oh, and if the `width` prop is less than '400px', it should be also `narrow`. Oh, and it should be `hidden` when either `hidden` prop is truthy but not equals to `"false"` string, and it should be also `fixed` when it isn't either `narrow` or `mobile`.

Wow. Such a mess.

But wait a minute. What if I tell you that you can tackle this problem with just five lines of pretty readable code?

```
className={ decide(styles, {
    header: true,
    mobile: props.isMobile,
    narrow: parseInt(props.width) < 400,
    hidden: (props.hidden !== "false" && Boolean(props.hidden)),
    fixed: parseInt(props.width) >= 400 || !props.isMobile
  })}
```

## Introducing Deciders

> Decider is something that makes decisions.

I was fed up making it manually, so I've created a library to tackle that mess. How? After all, we either apply the class name or not. So I thought, what if we can declare class names as the keys and the conditions should be values?

```JS
{
  header: true,  // will be always applied
  mobile: props.isMobile  // will be applied according to a prop
}
```

The result class names should be either `"header"` or `"header mobile"`.

The thing above is just an object. As long as it's not some kind of magical class instance, you can even generate it. You can return it from a function or promise. You can bring this from your REST API. This is simple and declarative.

Let's call this kind of object a _decision matrix_.

Now, we need to get this to work.

```JS
import decide from 'decider'
import styles from './header.module.css'

const classNames = decide(styles, {
  header: true,
  mobile: props.isMobile
})
```

Here you go. It's meaningful. It's simple and understandable. You can export it. The HTML and CSS are declarative, so as deciders.

Let's apply the styles:

```JS
export default props => (
 <header className={ classNames }>
   ...
 </header>
)
```

But what about order? Well, the class names order doesn't matter in HTML, so it doesn't matter in deciders either.

Let's solve the header class names' problem I declared at the beginning of the article! Here we go:

```JS
import decide from 'decider'
import styles from './header.module.css'

export default props => (
 <header className={ decide(styles, {
    header: true,
    mobile: props.isMobile,
    narrow: parseInt(props.width) < 400,
    hidden: props.hidden !== "false" || props.hidden,
    fixed: parseInt(props.width) >= 400 || !props.isMobile
  })} >
   ...
 </header>
)
```

Five strings of purely declared decisions.

## Differences from [classnames](https://www.npmjs.com/package/classnames)

-  `Decide` is a pure function. It works without that bind magic, so you can use it virtually anywhere.
-  Smaller bundle size: Decider is just 171 bytes away!
-  Syntax and usage are much easier to adopt

## Wrapping up

-  Switching class names manually is error-prone and overall not a pleasant thing to do
-  You can switch class names easily with deciders
-  If you want to do this, you should declare a _decision matrix_ – an object which has class names as keys and booleans as values
-  Decider is a `decide(styles, decisionMatrix)`. It returns a class names' string
-  You pass this string as a `className` prop to your component, and it works

## I want to adopt this right now!

[Here you go](https://github.com/mvoloskov/decider).

Alright, that's it! Keep your code clean, meaningful and understandable!
